Having long kept himself shrouded from most races, Vashtorr is a demi-god of inventors, engineers, scientists, and artisans. He is empowered by acts of curiosity (like Slaanesh) and innovation (like Tzeentch) in the Materium, shorn of morality and driven to its darkest extremes. He has only manifested a handful of times in galactic history, and some crypto-scholars maintain he was created amidst the reckless arms race of some ancient galaxy-spanning war. Others propose he was brought about by the horrors of the Dark Age of Technology, where he proved a patron to many of its technological horrors. He is also said to have been empowered by events such as the rise of the Necrons, the Cursed Founding, and the creation of Primaris Space Marines.

Vashtorr is not a slave of any of the four great Chaos Gods, instead maintaining his own sphere of influence and unique role within the Warp. He is the lord of the Forge of Souls, having grown powerful bartering souls with any Daemon or damned individual that seeks his services in the acquisition of Daemonic weaponry. Other are simply enslaved to his will and forced to join the ranks of his own armies.

Unlike most of his kind, Vashtorr rarely lies or conceals his true objectives. He establishes explicit contracts with clear terms and conditions. He has kept the wrath of The Four at bay due to the usefulness of his Daemon Engines to the armies of the Great Game, serving as its premier arms dealer. However, he is far from defenseless, and sports his own host of powerful techno-daemonic monstrosities. His activities have nonetheless attracted the ire of other Daemons, most notably Be'lakor.

Despite all he has achieved, Vashtorr has grown dissatisfied with his status. He seeks to become a fifth Chaos God in his own right. To that end, he seeks to fulfill a prophecy involving fragments of the mysterious Key and entered into an alliance with Abaddon the Despoiler. His proposal to Abaddon initiated the construction of the Arks of Omen and the war involving them.

During the Arks of Omen Campaign, Vashtorr led his own Ark Orac Unleashed in an invasion of The Rock, Fortress-Monastery of the Dark Angels and home to a Key-Fragment. However his carefully laid plans were spoiled as the Arkifane was on the cusp of victory thanks to the intervention of his hated rival Be'lakor, who suddenly appeared aboard The Rock with a host of his own. Be'lakor's forces were able to stagnate Vashtorr's advance into the Rock long enough for Imperial reinforcements to arrive. Enraged, Vashtorr engaged Be'lakor in a great duel that was largely even, with the Dark Master's shadow-sorcery a match for Vashtorr's technological abilities. However after scolding Vashtorr for his hubris, Be'lakor departed the war zone and seeing his plans were in ruins, Vashtorr quickly left as well. Afterwards, the Arkifane told Abaddon that not all was lost and he began devising a new plan focused around the Somnium Stars.

In the Somnium Stars, the vengeful Unforgiven fleet discovered that Vashtorr had converted the ruins of Caliban into a mechanical monstrosity known as the Wyrmwood. In the subsequent Battle of Idolatros, Vashtorr lost his Ark of Omen Orac Unleashed and saw Angron defeated by the returned Lion El'Jonson, but succeeded in activating The Key. Now, the Arkifane seeks The Lock and with it The Weapon.

Vashtorr next appeared during the later stages of the Pariah Crusade. In command of the Wyrmwood, Vashtorr was able to manipulate Magos Ghelf into opening a Warp Rift in the Nephilim Sector which has allowed his forces to pour into the region.